
  
    
      uid=CAP,o=LTER,dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org
      all
    
    
      public
      read
    
  
  
    doi:10.6073/pasta/201add557165740926aab6e056db6988
    Point-count bird censusing: long-term monitoring of bird abundance and diversity in
      central Arizona-Phoenix, ongoing since 2000
    
      Heather Bateman
      Arizona State University, Polytechnic campus
      heather.l.bateman@asu.edu
    
    
      Dan Childers
      Arizona State University
      dan.childers@asu.edu
    
    
      Madhusudan Katti
      Department of Forestry and Environmental Resources
      mkatti@ncsu.edu
      http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3076-3562
    
    
      Eyal Shochat
      Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
      eyal.shochat@gmail.com
    
    
      Paige Warren
      University of Massachusetts-Amherst
      pswarren@eco.umass.edu
    
    
      Stevan Earl
      Arizona State University
      stevan.earl@asu.edu
      http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4465-452X
    
    2017-11-21
    
      
        project overview
         Over the past half-century, the greater Phoenix metropolitan area (GPMA) has been one
          of the fastest growing regions in the US, experiencing rapid urban expansion in addition
          to urban intensification. This backdrop provides an ideal setting to monitor biodiversity
          changes in response to urbanization, and the CAP LTER has been using a standardized
          point-count protocol to monitor the bird community in the GPMA and surrounding Sonoran
          desert region since 2000. 
         The bird survey locations in this CAP LTER core monitoring program include six
          general site groupings: 
        
          
            
               ESCA. Forty bird survey locations were selected from a subset of the CAP LTER's
                Ecological Survey of Central Arizona (ESCA; formerly named Survey200) long-term
                monitoring sites. ESCA sites were located using a tessellation-stratified
                dual-density sampling design, and, as such, span a diversity of habitats including
                urban, suburban, rural, commercial areas, parks, agricultural fields, and native
                Sonoran desert. Earlier versions of this data package included data from the ESCA
                project that was intended to complement the bird data. However, while positioned in
                close proximity, the bird survey locations do not necessarily overlap with the 30m x
                30m plot that constitutes an ESCA sampling location, and leveraging data from these
                two monitoring programs should be addressed carefully. ESCA data have corresponding
                survey location names, and those data are available through the CAP LTER and LTER
                network data portals. At the conclusion of the 2016 spring survey, fifteen of the
                ESCA-correlated sites were discontinued as the core monitoring program refocused its
                efforts on desert parks and PASS neighborhoods. Among the deleted locations were all
                agricultural and commercial sites, as well as sites where access had become
                restrictive. 
            
            
               North Desert Village (NDV). Additional bird survey locations were positioned in
                treatment areas of the North Desert Village (NDV). This was a site of intense study
                on the Arizona State University Polytechnic Campus in which the CAP LTER converted
                the landscaping of small neighborhoods to reflect the dominant landscaping
                preferences employed throughout the GPMA. NDV landscape types include: oasis
                (NDV-O), xeric (NDV-X), mesic (NDV-M), control (NDV-C), and native (NDV-N).
                Monitoring at NDV was discontinued after the spring 2016 season as research efforts
                at this site came to an end. 
            
            
               Riparian. While the forty bird survey locations that were selected to coincide
                with ESCA sampling locations span a wide diversity of habitats throughout the GPMA,
                because of the generally random nature of selecting those sites, they did not
                reflect riparian habitats. Riparian areas are important bird habitat but constitute
                a very small area of the GPMA. To address this deficiency, bird survey locations
                were established specifically in twelve riparian habitats. Riparian habitat
                sub-types include: (1) ephemeral-engineered (EE, n=4), (2) ephemeral-natural (EN,
                n=2), (3) perennial-engineered (PE, n=3), and (4) perennial-natural (PN, n=3). This
                research was successfully concluded and these sites were discontinued after the
                spring 2016 season. 
            
            
               Salt River. Seven study sites along the Salt River as it runs through the GPMA
                that were selected as part of a related study (Salt River Biodiversity Project
                (SRBP)) were ultimately included in the CAP LTER's core bird monitoring programs.
                These sites reflect continued monitoring of riparian habitat. 
            
            
               Desert Fertilization. Beginning with the 2016-2017 winter survey, six sites at
                desert parks were added to core monitoring to coincide with the CAP LTER Desert
                Fertilization (DesFert) experiment sites. 
            
            
               PASS. Beginning with the 2016-2017 winter survey, what used to be a separate
                bird-monitoring effort (monitoring in Phoenix Area Social Survey (PASS)
                neighborhoods) was incorporated into this core bird-monitoring program. Eight points
                were carried over from prior PASS monitoring, and 28 new points established,
                resulting in three bird monitoring locations in each of the twelve PASS
                neighborhoods. Visiting these locations each year, versus only in years surrounding
                the PASS survey as done previously, provides more data on bird populations found in
                the neighborhoods of the CAP LTER study area. 
            
          
        
      
      
        method overview
         In a given season, each bird survey location is visited independently by three
          birders who count all birds seen or heard within a 15-minute window. The frequency of
          surveys has varied through the life of the project. The first year of the project (2000)
          was generally a pilot year in which each site was visited approximately twice by a varying
          number of birders. The monitoring became more formalized beginning in 2001, and each site
          was visited in each of four seasons by three birders. The frequency of visits was reduced
          to three seasons in 2005, and to two season (spring, winter) beginning in 2006. 
      
    
    
      urban
      birds
      species abundance
      species composition
      communities
      community composition
      LTER controlled vocabulary
    
    
      disturbance patterns
      population studies
      adapting to city life
      LTER core areas and CAP LTER IRTs
    
    
      aves
      avifauna
      Creator Defined Keyword Set
    
    
      cap lter
      cap
      caplter
      central arizona phoenix long term ecological research
      arizona
      az
      arid land
      CAPLTER Keyword Set List
    
    Copyright Board of Regents, Arizona State University. This information is
      released to the public and may be used for academic, educational, or commercial purposes
      subject to the following restrictions. While the CAP LTER will make every effort possible to
      control and document the quality of the data it publishes, the data are made available 'as
      is'. The CAP LTER cannot assume responsibility for damages resulting from mis-use or
      mis-interpretation of datasets, or from errors or omissions that may exist in the data. It is
      considered a matter of professional ethics to acknowledge the work of other scientists that
      has resulted in data used in subsequent research. The CAP LTER expects that any use of data
      from this server will be accompanied with the appropriate citations and acknowledgments. The
      CAP LTER encourages users to contact the original investigator responsible for the data that
      they are accessing. Where appropriate, researchers whose projects are integrally dependent on
      CAP LTER data are encouraged to consider collaboration and/or co-authorship with original
      investigators. The CAP LTER requests that users submit to the Julie Ann Wrigley Global
      Institute of Sustainability at Arizona State University reference to any publication(s)
      resulting from the use of data obtained from this site. The CAP LTER requests that users not
      redistribute data obtained from this site. However, links or references to this site may be
      freely posted.
    
      
        CAPLTER Metadata URL
        https://sustainability.asu.edu/caplter/data/data-catalog/view/knb-lter-cap.46.14/xml/
      
    
    
      
        CAP LTER study area
        
          -112.742
          -111.622
          33.8814
          33.2187
        
      
      
        
          
            2000-06-06
          
          
            2017-10-26
          
        
      
    
    
      Julie Ann Wrigley Global Institute of Sustainability, Arizona State
        University
      Data Manager
      			PO Box 875402
			Tempe, AZ 85287  USA
      caplter.data@asu.edu
    
    
      
        
           CAP LTER BIRDING POINT COUNT PROTOCOL Revised December 2014 
          
            POINT COUNTS
             A point count consists of one person standing in a specific location for a fixed
              length of time at a specific time of day, and counting all birds seen and/or heard
              within a specific distance ("Fixed Radius") or as far as the eye can see ("Open
              Radius.") 
            
              
                
                   CAP LTER uses 15-minute observation periods 
                
                
                   Counts are completed within 4 hours of local sunrise (see provided table
                    for sunrise time) 
                
                
                   Counts are done using the "Open Radius" method 
                
              
            
          
          
            ADDITIONAL OBSERVERS
             The primary observer may be accompanied to the point by an additional observer.
              However,only the observations of the primary observer should be recorded on the data
              sheet. To avoid any bias that would invalidate the data collected, the secondary
              observer should not verbalize, point out birds, or give any non-verbal cues to the
              primary observer (e.g., looking at a bird with binoculars is a non-verbal cue). The
              second observer should position itself in order to minimize disturbance to birds as
              well as to the primary observer. Ideally, the second observer will stand near the
              primary observer and slowly move around or bend down so that he/she does not obstruct
              the primary observer views. 
            
              
                
                   Please note in the "Site Condition" section of the datasheet if an
                    additional observer was present during the count. 
                
                
                   If the secondary observer sees a species that the primary observer did not
                    see, it may be noted in the "Notable additional bird species" section. 
                
              
            
          
          
            COUNT CONDITIONS
            
              
                
                   The first point count should be started no earlier than local sunrise. The
                    final point count should be finished no later than 4 hours past local sunrise.
                  
                
                
                   Do not conduct point counts in steady or heavy rain, though it is
                    acceptable to conduct counts in light, intermittent drizzle (be sure to make
                    note of this in the "Precipitation" section of the data sheet). 
                
                
                   Do not conduct point counts in steady winds above 20 mph (visual cue =
                    branches of a moderate size move, small trees in leaves begin to sway). Make a
                    note of the wind condition in the "Wind" section of the datasheet. 
                
                
                  In the "Disturbance" section, note if yes or no any type of disturbance
                    occurred during the count, and describe the disturbance under the "Site
                    Condition" section of the datasheet. A disturbance may involve disturbing you,
                    the observer (e.g., a homeowner came and talked to you), or disturbing the birds
                    (e.g., a cat chasing birds, garbage truck making lots of noise and flushing
                    birds, predator flew by and flushed birds, etc.).
                
                
                   If YOU, the observer, are being disturbed during the 15-minute count period
                    for any reason, make a note of the interruption in the "Site Condition" section.
                    Time should be paused for the duration of the interruption and resumed once the
                    interruption event is terminated. Redo the count entirely if you are unsure of
                    the time you were disrupted for. 
                
                
                   Make a note of the overall noise condition for the whole count period in
                    the "Noise" section of the datasheet. 
                
              
            
          
          
            APPROACHING THE POINT and FILLING TOP OF DATASHEET
            
              
                
                   Park your vehicle at >40m from the bird point. 
                
                
                   Approach the plot as quietly as possible to minimize disturbance to the
                    birds present. 
                
                
                  In the "Notable additional bird species" section, make note of any bird
                    species flushed by the approach in case they do not return during the count.
                  
                
                
                   Under "Notable additional bird species", note bird species seen/heard
                    before and/or after the count. Bird species recorded under this section are
                    species NOT observed during the count but observed while at the site. 
                
                
                   Stand quietly at plot center for 5 minutes before starting the count. This
                    is essential to allow any disturbance caused by the approach to settle down.
                  
                
                
                   Use this 5-minute settle-down time to fill out the information at the top
                    of the datasheet, set up the noise meter, and find your distance brackets (5m,
                    10m, 20m, 40m) with the range finder. Note that the range finder MAY be in
                    yards. If so, the conversion of yards to meters is: 5m = 5.4yrd; 10m = 10.9yrd;
                    20m = 21.9yrd; 40m = 43.7yrd. 
                
                
                   Record in the "Site condition" section any unusual circumstances around the
                    plot, such as construction activity or flooding, or anything you noticed that
                    have changed since your last visit. Also note presence of water (or absence of
                    it) at sites where water is typically present such as at the riparian sites
                    (site code starting with "EE", "EN", "PE", or "PN"). 
                
                
                   Record "Site Obstruction" as the percent of the horizon view that is
                    blocked by something within a 20-m radius of the point. Record this every visit,
                    even if it does not appear to have changed since your last visit. Record in 5%
                    increments. 
                
              
            
          
          
            CONDUCTING THE COUNT
             After the 5-minute settle-down period, set a watch or timer and conduct the count
              for 15 minutes. Rotate slowly in place and record all birds seen and/or heard. For
              each observation, note the following in the appropriate column of the data sheet. 
             Species 
            
              
                
                   the four-letter (English name) 54th AOU Supplement (2013) alpha codes if
                    known (see bird list code provided), or write down the complete common name.
                  
                
                
                   If the species cannot be positively identified, use the closest taxonomic
                    affiliation (it is better to record something as "unknown" rather than
                    guessing). Make sure you look at all the "unidentified" code options listed on
                    the bird list code provided to pick the most appropriate code. 
                
              
            
             Number of Individuals and Distance 
            
              
                
                   Usually, a single individual bird will be recorded per line. 
                
                
                   Only record a number greater than one on a single line if birds of the same
                    species are observed very close together, such as a flock or family group.
                  
                
                
                   If a mixed flock is observed, put each species on a separate line and note
                    in the "Notes" column that they were part of a mixed flock. 
                
                
                   Record estimated flock sizes (e.g., "10-20" or "15+") only if you cannot
                    count them all. 
                
                
                   Write the number of individuals observed in the appropriate distance
                    columns. 
                
                
                  If a bird moves during the count, record only the distance at which it was
                    first observed. 
                
                
                   Pay close attention to bird movement to avoid counting birds twice. 
                
                
                   Birds such as hummingbirds should be recorded in the distance column if
                    they are using the habitat (such as when they are observed foraging) even if
                    they are not perched per say. However, if you see them just flying quickly by or
                    chasing each other, then they should be recorded as FT. 
                
              
            
             Fly-Throughs (FT) 
            
              
                
                   If a bird is seen flying through the count area below the tallest structure
                    or vegetation, and not observed taking off or landing, record it in the "FT"
                    column only, not in the distance columns. 
                
                
                   See note above regarding when to record hummingbirds as FT. 
                
                
                   High flying birds can be noted as a FT only if they are "aerial screeners"
                    using the habitat, such as a hawk circling 100 feet overhead looking for food.
                    Make a note if the aerial screener is flying higher than the tallest structure.
                  
                
                
                   You may note in the "Site Condition" section any unusual fly-overs of birds
                    NOT using the habitat, such as a flock of Pelicans flying above the city.
                  
                
              
            
             Seen (S) or Heard (H) Columns 
            
              
                
                   Record with a check mark whether the bird was identified from sight (S) or
                    sound (H), or both. Use caution with similar-sounding birds like Juncos and
                    Chipping Sparrows, or with mimics and imitators, like Mockingbirds and
                    Starlings. 
                
              
            
             Direction 
            
              
                
                   Record the direction the bird was first observed or heard. This may mean
                    recording a bird heard to the south (S) even though you were facing northwest
                    (N/W) at the time. 
                
                
                   Use the cardinal and mid-cardinal points of the compass (N, N/E, E, S/E, S,
                    S/W, W, N/W) in this column. 
                
              
            
          
          
            ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS
            
              
                
                   After the count is completed and before leaving the site, review your data
                    sheet to ensure you have filled it correctly: make sure you have a count and
                    distance for all observations, and that the top part of your datasheet is
                    complete. 
                
                
                   Record under "Notable additional bird species" section ONLY birds USING THE
                    HABITAT. This section is to record bird species seen using the habitat, but not
                    recorded during the count. 
                
                
                   Under the "Site Condition" section, you may note species such as Cormorants
                    or Pelicans flying high above but NOT using the habitat. 
                
                
                   Record under "Non-bird species present" any non-bird species observed at
                    the site or fresh signs of non-bird species (i.e., coyote scat) at the site
                  
                
                
                   Wear drab clothing and avoid bold patterns that might scare away some
                    birds, or attract other ones. 
                
                
                   During the count, do not "pish", "squeak", or use any other methods to
                    encourage birds to show themselves. This would artificially inflate the bird
                    densities recorded and invalidate the data collected. If you want to see a bird
                    you had difficulty identifying, you can "pish" only after the count is
                    completed. 
                
                
                   Use the 15-minute count period effectively; do not spend precious time
                    trying to identify a bird that is far enough so that a spotting scope would be
                    necessary to identify the species. 
                
                
                   Do not start or continue a count if personal safety is threatened in any
                    way. Notify CAP LTER bird research group managers of any threat to safety
                    encountered at a research plot. 
                
                
                   If the full 15-minute point count survey cannot be completed entirely for
                    any reasons (e.g. weather, time limits, safety, etc.), the count must be re-done
                    entirely and completed at another time within the season survey window. 
                
              
            
          
          
            DATA AND COMMUNICATION
            
              
                
                   To minimize errors, please review and complete your data sheets within a
                    day or so after the survey, preferably the day of the survey. In between others,
                    make sure you did not leave any blank spaces, review all the alpha codes (if
                    uncertain of an alpha code, verify it with the bird list code provided or write
                    the FULL common name), complete your notes and make them concise, and preform
                    necessary research (listen to calls and/or look at different field guides) to
                    fill in your uncertain identification(s) when possible. The datasheets must be
                    clear and easy to read to facilitate data entry and prevent errors. 
                
                
                   All completed datasheets (reviewed for errors) must be returned to ASU
                    within two weeks of the last survey completed during that season. 
                
                
                   To facilitate communication and to aid the supervisor in tracking project
                    progress and scheduling, make at least one entry per week on the google+ project
                    resource page – be sure particularly to note if you surveyed all your assigned
                    sites for the week or if you missed some (specify which ones), report
                    interesting/unusual sightings and specify where you saw them, and report any
                    problems (i.e., site access issues, road closures, safety concerns, scheduling
                    issues, etc). 
                
              
            
          
        
      
    
    
      46_core_birds_ee23527b9fad8b2ead1a6f0b4471ab1e.csv
      bird survey sampling details (site, date, time, observer, site conditions, and notes) and birds surveyed (type, number, distance from observer, behavior)
      
        46_core_birds_ee23527b9fad8b2ead1a6f0b4471ab1e.csv
        31865145
        ee23527b9fad8b2ead1a6f0b4471ab1e
        
          
            1
            \r\n
            column
            
              ,
              "
            
          
        
        
          
            https://pasta.lternet.edu/package/data/eml/knb-lter-cap/46/15/1ac975d0d3272f2eabe68a66e9f908ad
          
        
      
      
        
          site_code
          survey location identifier
          string
          
            
              
                
                  survey location identifier
                
              
            
          
        
        
          location_type
          survey site type
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    ESCA
                    colocated with Ecological Survey of Central Arizona (ESCA)
                  
                  
                    NDV
                    North Desert Village, ASU Polytechnic Campus
                  
                  
                    Riparian
                    Riparian habitat
                  
                  
                    PASS
                    Phoenix Area Social Survey (PASS) study neighborhoods
                  
                  
                    DesertFertilization
                    Phoenix area mountain parks that are part of the Desert Fertilization study
                  
                  
                    SRBP
                    Salt River Biological Project
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          survey_date
          survey date
          date
          
            
              YYYY-MM-DD
            
          
        
        
          time_start
          survey start time
          date
          
            
              hh:mm:ss
            
          
        
        
          time_end
          survey end time
          date
          
            
              hh:mm:ss
            
          
        
        
          observer_name_part
          truncated name of surveyor
          string
          
            
              
                
                  truncated name of surveyor
                
              
            
          
        
        
          wind_speed
          wind speed
          float
          
            
              
                kilometersPerHour
              
              
                real
              
            
          
        
        
          wind_dir
          wind direction
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    NE
                    north east
                  
                  
                    S
                    south
                  
                  
                    SE
                    south east
                  
                  
                    NW
                    north west
                  
                  
                    E
                    east
                  
                  
                    N
                    north
                  
                  
                    W
                    west
                  
                  
                    SW
                    south west
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          air_temp
          air temperature
          float
          
            
              
                celsius
              
              
                real
              
            
          
        
        
          cloud_cover
          percent cloud cover
          float
          
            
              
                dimensionless
              
              
                real
              
            
          
        
        
          survey_notes
          notes regarding survey
          string
          
            
              
                
                  notes regarding survey
                
              
            
          
        
        
          human_activity_notes
          notes regarding any human activity during the survey
          string
          
            
              
                
                  notes regarding any human activity during the survey
                
              
            
          
        
        
          wind
          qualitative assessment of wind speed during the survey
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    none
                    no perecptible wind
                  
                  
                    light
                    light wind
                  
                  
                    gusts
                    wind gusts
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          precipitation
          qualitative assessment of precipitation during the survey
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    none
                    no precipitation
                  
                  
                    light_rain
                    light rain
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          disturbances
          indication of a disturbance to the surveyor at the survey location during the survey
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    0
                    no perceptible disturbance to observer or in the vicinity during the survey
                  
                  
                    1
                    disturbance occurred during the survey
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          sight_obstruct
          percent of the view obstructed
          float
          
            
              
                dimensionless
              
              
                real
              
            
          
        
        
          noise_level
          qualitative assessment of noise level during the survey
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    none
                    no noise during survey
                  
                  
                    low
                    low level noise during the survey
                  
                  
                    high
                    high level of noise during the survey
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          site_condition
          notes regarding the condition of the survey location
          string
          
            
              
                
                  notes regarding the condition of the survey location
                
              
            
          
        
        
          non_bird_species
          notes regarding non-bird fauna observed during the survey
          string
          
            
              
                
                  notes regarding non-bird fauna observed during the survey
                
              
            
          
        
        
          code
          four-letter alpha code of observed taxon
          string
          
            
              
                
                  four-letter alpha code of observed taxon
                
              
            
          
        
        
          common_name
          common name of observed taxon
          string
          
            
              
                
                  common name of observed taxon
                
              
            
          
        
        
          distance
          relative distance or position of observed bird(s) relative to the observer
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    0-5
                    bird observed within zero to five meters of observer
                  
                  
                    5-10
                    bird observed five to ten meters from observer
                  
                  
                    10-20
                    bird observed ten to twenty meters from observer
                  
                  
                    20-40
                    bird observed twenty to forty meters from observer
                  
                  
                    >40
                    bird observed forty or more meters from observer
                  
                  
                    FT
                    bird is seen flying through the count area below the tallest structure or vegetation, and not observed taking off or landing
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          bird_count
          quantity of the observed taxon
          float
          
            
              
                number
              
              
                real
              
            
          
        
        
          observation_notes
          notes regarding bird observation
          string
          
            
              
                
                  notes regarding bird observation
                
              
            
          
        
        
          seen
          indication of whether the bird was seen
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    0
                    bird not identified by sight
                  
                  
                    1
                    bird identified by sight
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          heard
          indication of whether the bird was heard
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    0
                    bird not identified by sound
                  
                  
                    1
                    bird identified by sound
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          direction
          direction of the bird
          string
          
            
              
                
                  
                    NW
                    north west
                  
                  
                    S
                    south
                  
                  
                    N
                    north
                  
                  
                    NE
                    north east
                  
                  
                    SE
                    south east
                  
                  
                    W
                    west
                  
                  
                    SW
                    south west
                  
                  
                    E
                    east
                  
                
              
            
          
        
        
          QCcomment
          quality control comments
          string
          
            
              
                
                  quality control comments
                
              
            
          
        
      
      151383
    
    
      46_core_bird_locations_500433d02ee19d938b4b4bc48928c6df.kml
      bird survey locations
      
        46_core_bird_locations_500433d02ee19d938b4b4bc48928c6df.kml
        31183
        500433d02ee19d938b4b4bc48928c6df
        
          
            kml
          
        
        
          
            https://pasta.lternet.edu/package/data/eml/knb-lter-cap/46/15/f5a501a8dcb69ff228eb0d55e26a01f3
          
        
      
      kml
    
  
